Profession	Text
Head of preschool	"I will not leave a long story but just confirm that even us preschool managers, who
should be the ones who support, work with an impossible mission! Or we can make it work
right on the border! I think it is shameful that politicians do not understand the seriousness and give us
better conditions. I see staff tearing the hedge off! That hits the wall! Crying.
Then I also see joy. A damn embrace. Love for his profession! But having to discuss
whether you can afford to bake gingerbread cookies or not is the level the preschool's budget is at!
Wake up! I just want to say that for every staff that goes into the wall, there will be one
failure for us managers. And the next step is that we walk into the same wall! It is an evil
spiral! I know that you have to be loyal to your employer and that's who I am as I continue
fight for the preschool and do the best with the funds we have! But I agree with that
as long as we fight in the shadows, the truth will not come out. And it's not my bosses fault
but it is a system error in politics!"
Preschool teacher	"I am a fifty-year-old preschool teacher who has worked in childcare (preschool class, leisure
and preschool) for over thirty years. Dismantling began in the early 1990s. Then I worked
at afternoon home. We were three educators of 12 9-11 year olds. Lots of time was there too
preparation/planning, in the mornings when the children were at school.
A few years ago, I worked in a pre-school class and in 6-year free time. In our spare time we were one
regular teacher and two substitutes of approx. 50 six-year-olds. Several with special needs. So
the difference is miles wide in the change from the early 1990s to the present.
I have also worked in a preschool, with children aged 2-5 years in wards with just over 20 children
barely three educators. Nowhere in the last ten years has there been an opportunity to be able to
plan fully in their planning time (this has had to be done at home in the evenings and weekends), then have
you immediately had to drop in on departments where there is a lack of staff for the day.
This, together with my own sick children, has caused me to be on sick leave
exhaustion syndrome and stress for four long periods over a number of years. It's so sad. I
would like to be able to work with the children and do a good job, be safe and present. I
You never know when your body and soul will give up next time. My self-confidence at work has gained
solid thorns.
I want to be able to be a happy, proud and ambitious preschool teacher. Enough for all children. As
can work without getting sick. Make sure to visit the toilet during the day. Be able to take a full break and be able to
laugh, talk and joke with my colleagues sometimes."
Preschool teacher	"Help the staff - our children are suffering - http://www.aftonbladet.se/a/MyEaJ
Agree with Ida Thorén in everything she describes about the preschool's activities. There is a solution
and that is to abolish 15,30 and 40!!! hours of preschool for children on parental leave. Many
municipalities today offer an excellent opportunity for parental leave and
unemployed to socialize and build new relationships and that activity is called open preschool.
Our little citizens of society need committed parents who offer them a calmer
and safer upbringing but also help socialize their little ones by giving them
opportunity to do so through the open preschool. There the children get together with their parents
take part in a song collection, activities such as Easter crafts, etc. They also get under calmer
circumstances together with their parents practice building new relationships, with others
children and adults. It is time to face the truth and SEE what is happening to young children
who stay in large groups of children (up to 40 hours a week, even though mother or father is
at home?!) with perhaps one regular staff and 2 substitutes. These children are being let down by ours
politicians, their own parents and The Fantastic Preschool! The staff does everything they can,
with very little means. BUT they don't last long. Spoke yesterday with a recent graduate
(worked for 1.5 years) preschool teacher who now feels she made a wrong choice. All her visions have
graveled and despite the fact that she loves to be involved in the further development of a young person, so chooses
she now has to look around for another job. She says - It's terribly frustrating and
therefore very stressful to constantly work with temporary workers and despite his few years in the profession to be
the one the business leans towards! I can not take it! I have started to sleep badly and worry
constantly because what can happen, I'm not enough!!! So take your responsibility elected officials and
abolish 15, 30 and 40 hours of preschool for those who are unemployed and on parental leave. Ensure
the children who must be in the preschool's care receive the educational activities they deserve,
expand the open preschool and you will find that the children start to feel better, they become more
motivated to study when they start school. Added to that is another win. The staff
will stay, they will have more energy to further develop the preschool's activities, which in the end
will benefit our youngest citizens. Thanks for the word!"
Preschool teacher	"Working in a fantastic team in a house with good cooperation. In recent years it has
have been cutbacks and periodic stoppages of substitutes and purchasing stops. In 2017, it was big
savings and we took in more children in a group with many children in need of extra support in different
way. That was the final straw. More and more it was noticed that all energy had to be put into that handful
children who most clearly needed it. More crying, more conflict and some ""disappeared"". We made it through
it's thanks to us being so tightly knit but by the end of the day we were completely drained, which our
families could see. Sleep problems also appeared. Some of the children who occupied a lot of time
went on to pre-school class so we looked forward to autumn ""when it would be as usual"" again.
During the autumn, the downsizing continued along with the fact that it was not possible to get hold of
substitutes, something we have never encountered before. Then the good atmosphere in the house disappeared very quickly
unfortunately. But what's worse is that we now have to reap what we sowed, a divided group of children with incredible
great need for attention without group feeling where conflicts arise quickly and often. We
barely have time to talk to each other during the day but try to think about being professional
and give lots of praise for keeping your spirits up. The sleeping problems have escalated and I hope
just that none of us get hurt worse. It cuts my heart when I think of the children in this year's group
who suffer, those who don't act outwardly but need support in other ways, because we don't have time for that
work with. Deplorable."
Preschool teacher	"I have worked as a preschool teacher for 9 years. During the 9 years I have worked at 4 different preschools in
3 municipalities. I have had about 24 colleagues if you count those who worked in the department more
than 2 months. Of these, 9 have been preschool teachers, 7 have been childminders or trained to do so
something else related to the profession and 8 have been temporary colleagues without training.
At the longest, I have had the same colleagues for 1.5 years, but then one of the colleagues has been temporary
and uneducated. Six months is the longest time I have worked together with 2 educated colleagues who
were permanently employed.
I have many times felt stuck before a new semester and planned and felt that this
will be good. Unfortunately, the inadequacy, stress and lack of time have always made the feeling in
the end of the semester is always dejection and frustration. I have been like that on several occasions
broke over the situation that I didn't know how I would be able to continue working with this. I have
also took a break from the profession and trained for something else, but then it was difficult to get a job
within the new profession, I ended up back in the preschool, but then chose to work 75% for
be able to. I know that I actually enjoy the job if only the conditions to do one
good jobs had existed. Unfortunately, the desire and energy for work has run out in all the puzzle land and
one is not enough to do more than the bare essentials. Instead, I look at alternatives
ways to go. Because I know that it doesn't help to change workplaces within the same profession, as I have
good colleagues and a good workplace today and that the bad conditions that make me feel
bad are the same everywhere. If there is no change, I will not remain in the profession. I have really seen the difference in what it does for a group of children to be the same staff
over time. It is more important than education, but education allows you to get ahead and
longer with the quality work. But in terms of continuity and calm in the children's group, the most important thing is
continuity in the staff group. I feel that I will never advance in the profession because the whole thing
time personnel change. The reasons why I have had so many different colleagues have been many;
I myself have chosen to change jobs a few times due to a lack of regular and trained staff
and absent manager, then a colleague has moved and thus quit, someone has joined
pension, some have been on sick leave and some have chosen to change professions, among other things.
For every child that is added or taken away, there are many elements that increase. It's a child
to be helped at the breakfast table, another child to be changed a few times a year
day, one more child to dress at the exit and undress at the entrance, one more child to help at lunch
and snacks, one more child to plan for, etc. Equally, a child does less to all these
moment decreases with a child. Having more children with the same number of staff in the middle of the day
means that each child gets less time from each of us adults, just as each child less gives more time
to each individual child. It's not just a child more or less, it's a child more or
less in all aspects of the day. Being able to have fewer children in the children's groups has many benefits.
The children are seen more during the day, we educators can more easily feel a sense of calm because we have time
with each child and don't have to stress ourselves through the different parts of the day to manage to make it
with. There will be fewer children who will have to share the spaces the preschool consists of. The children are not exposed
for the same number of relationships and contagion does not spread as much if there are fewer children together
together. We manage to be out longer in the winter months as it doesn't have to take an hour
to get all the children dressed and get them out. There is a larger margin to be able to cope
absence of colleagues without having to bring in substitutes, which also reduces the number of temporary workers
relationships for the children. I also think that the profession would become more attractive to want to work in both
for preschool teachers and substitutes and more had managed to stay in the profession and not have to change or
be on sick leave."
Preschool teacher	"Substitute stoppage, committed educators who call in sick because they can't take it, educators
who cannot achieve either curriculum, school law or other regulations, a constant feeling that
not enough. The list can be made as long as desired... The bottom line is that this is unsustainable.
Educator after educator disappears from the business and the list of qualified staff is coming soon
non-existent. And when new staff are sought, there is not a single qualified staff member who applies.
Wonder why!"
Preschool teacher	"Finances and children's groups go hand in hand. Bad economy = larger groups of children. If
the economy could be stabilized, the children's groups could also be reduced!"
Preschool teacher	"I think my work as a preschool teacher is fantastically fun and developing! For eleven years
then, after working in large children's groups, my health gave way and I stopped working within
the preschool. Before that, I had time to work in a children's group for a few years with about 15
children which was great! Two years ago I started working as a preschool teacher again and found that there is a lack of trained people
staff, which meant working with temporary workers to an increasing degree. The managerial role at the preschool had
also changes as a lot of time went into recruiting staff. Many days are about getting
bring temporary workers into the work to achieve the best possible operation. In case of absence among
staff as the only regular staff meant many times; to be the staff that
contacts the warden if necessary, put in substitute orders, quickly come up with a plan for
the day together with staff from other departments because the substitute pool could not
offer a substitute for the day (usually with refusal in the case of substitutes). Many
times ensure that 9-14 children get breakfast and at the same time accommodate more arriving children, that
then ensure that the children are divided into playgroups while waiting for the next staff member. Remember that
cancel today's sick colleague's development interview with a child's parents and at the same time
cancel meetings and plans. Sometimes staff can come from another department and
back up until the next staff member arrives. Standing questions replace each other; without substitute,
identify what kind of help we need and inform other staff at the house throughout
day, who will work together with the colleague after 1:30 p.m. when I have to go home? How do we solve?
the breaks? Always think about safety! How can we create the best possible conditions for the children
who has just entered school and needs an adult's presence, and how does the child who is in need of
supportive and preventive resources to have their needs met? Many of the days of the year
time is spent devising the best possible priorities with a constant guilty conscience not to
attend to the children's needs to the extent that they should. Last fall I was all by myself with 16
kids for lunch!"
Preschool teacher	"A few years ago I worked at a resource preschool. To come to a group of about 12 children
meant being able to suffice! Getting to work with a group of fewer children meant for me not to
having to have a disturbed night's sleep, because the brain cannot let go of the day's impressions and constant thoughts
how to arrive at the best possible solutions when there is a lack of staff. In addition, how
the environment must be kept safe from accidents and that how I will cope with. Anxiety during certain periods,
what does tomorrow look like? Nowadays, as I said, I work in a large children's group and there is
days when the staff is on site and the children can be divided into groups and the play and learning processes
works well based on the conditions given. But managing as many contacts as
large groups of children eat away at the children's and staff's energies. It's too many days with
redirection in the absence of staff.
The days with pressure together form a series of mosquito bites which consequently lead to
illness. Unfortunately that's where I'm at and my body has given way, I can still walk
to work and deliver because I work part-time. There needs to be an investment in providing staff
prerequisites for also obtaining a good, long-term working environment! The strained
the situation at the preschool is not an individual matter, it is a structural and political one
question!"
Preschool teacher	"I have worked for two years as a preschool teacher and it feels like I have already had time to participate
most of it. When I started at my current preschool, I was immediately told that
the economy was bad.
In the two years that I have worked at this preschool, I have changed colleagues three times. Many
resigns and moves on in the hope that it will be better elsewhere.
But I have remained, but after a year of toil and constant loss of staff and too big
children's group, I could barely take it anymore either.
After a year, things started to lighten up and the team started to work together and we got along very well
Good! We were able to breathe a little and carry out what we planned and I felt proud of ours
section.
But then the economy was at rock bottom. We got buying stops and were and still are forced to reverse
inside and out on ourselves before we can put in substitutes. Of course we can say no but because
make it easier for the entire preschool, we stand up for each other and fight on. Because we all want to
the preschool must go around and survive.
But who thanks us?
We work overtime, take in children who would actually be free or the children who could be
at home with sick little sister/little brother who is actually at home with one parent that day.
We smile and welcome with open arms. We hug, comfort and encourage, but under the surface
we fight tooth and nail to keep the business afloat, quietly. Because we can
not stand in the hall and say it like it is in front of our parents? Right? I love my job, I love my children and my colleagues. I'm proud that we can handle it
fight together.
I am happy to do everything and a little more to ensure that the children have a good time at preschool. I plan on
Sundays if I feel like it. Because I think it's fun and to have time to plan
and implement the things that I am passionate about.
But.. Preschool is for learning and care. But in order for us to achieve such good learning and
care as possible, smaller groups of children are required to lower the stress level and the noise level
both for us educators but mostly for our children.
As it is today, every day I feel guilty because I don't have time. I will make it
don't talk to all the kids every day. I don't have time to help them print that nice fill in
the drawing they wanted so badly. I often have to interrupt them when they want to tell me things or ask questions
if anything - because I have to be in several places at the same time. Because we are never enough.
Please all the politicians out there, I love my job and my kids but we all get down on our knees and
soon can't take it anymore."
Preschool teacher-student	"Short and concise story from the preschool of reality. According to the politicians in the city of Gothenburg, there are
there is room/place for 6 more children at our preschool this term. We will then have 23 children
the department for the oldest, 19 in the middle and 18 in the younger with a staffing density of 3
educators in each department. Tomorrow the semester starts and we don't even have
chairs for all children."
Preschool teacher	"Sick leave since Easter 2017. That day I couldn't find home. Called my husband in a panic. Cried
continuously. Anxiety. Insomnia. Then the tears stopped and the anxiety took over. My memory
disappeared. Barely recognized my children. I saw they were talking to me but I couldn't
understand the words. We then had almost 20 children in 4 part-time jobs. Colleagues who quit. Pressed
work environment with many children in need of support and NO resources. The manager quit and no one
was there to safely lead us forward. We did everything so that the children would not notice the chaos
as we experienced as staff. The municipality required us to write our documentation. Page
up and side down. I would be the supervisor of a student who did an internship on his own
workplace. On the last day, I wrote her evaluation. When I shut down the computer it happened
black. Which car is mine? Where do I live? How did I get home? Today I work 15 hours
the week. The orc does not exist. The insurance company is breathing down my neck. The job as well. Must come
back quickly or you will have to be relocated. The anxiety is there. Life is not the same and
will never be. I fall and don't know how to get up. Who thanks me? No."
Preschool teacher	"The temporary worker shortage feels very stressful at times. I work at a rural preschool and that
seems to be more difficult to get substitutes there. Many also do not have a driver's license. What should we do with it?
the day those who are pensioners but don't work as temporary workers can't take it anymore?! Not having enough
planning time is also a stressful moment, we are only three preschool teachers out of seven employees at my centre
Job. Then we preschool teachers need more planning time to get everything done as we should
do. Instead of having to put things off until next week. Invest more in us preschool teachers
or hire more preschool teachers! So we who are preschool teachers can go home from work and think:
today has been a good working day. I managed to get what I needed."
Preschool teacher	"When I get home in the evening, my tinnitus reminds me. I sit exhausted on the sofa
while my fortunately equal husband both takes care of the children and prepares the food. No musts
cope with and when it's time to put the children to bed, I fall asleep first of all.
Nevertheless, I am one of those who love this job. We are getting fewer and fewer, it feels like, but like
preschool teachers you constantly learn new things, meet new personalities and make a difference! Do
difference... That's what I dreamed of when I went into this. Getting to meet each child, get them
to feel loved for who they are and open a world of possibilities to them. But it will be
never quite like that. My colleagues are on sick leave, it's stomach bug no. 3, flu, autumn blisters,
fever cold no. 43, migraines from stress, pressure and high noise levels and right what it is takes
run out of energy with one more person walking into the wall. It is difficult to find a substitute with
appropriate education. That meeting each child will have to wait... again. Now it's like that
many times to get through the day. The children's development potential and self-esteem get
we take another day. Because it wasn't that important anyway, was it?"
Preschool teacher	"Works at a preschool with 40 children in the department and 9 teachers. We share during the days
into smaller groups. After a tough autumn with 2 educators who have largely been gone
one or more days each week throughout the autumn, due to various illnesses and a teacher
long-term sick leave, it has led to me being left alone in our smaller group of 14
pieces 2-3 year olds. This is because 2 of the teachers who were ill were with me in my group.
I have been sitting alone with our action plan and have not been able to carry out any activities
in 3 months but it has been pure storage of children aged 2-3 years. This group was one
safe children's group at the start last autumn, but unfortunately became more and more insecure when there were new ones
substitutes if there was any substitute available at all. One child was very sensitive
for new people and panicked when new faces arrived. The child just cried and cried, which
made me sit down to comfort this child while I had 13 more children to cater to
group, because I was their security regarding diaper changes, potty training, toilet training. Be on
road and crash into the infamous wall as I forgot things on several occasions, had a hard time
to sleep and experienced heart palpitations when I was going to sleep. My salvation in this was that I
got to stay home and babysit with my youngest child for a few days."
Preschool teacher	"I have a long-term substitute in my smaller group who is on sick leave for 1 month. The substitute has been
sick a lot throughout the autumn and it has continued in the same way. She is employed until the end
March and shall possibly get extended until the end of June. I have pointed this out to the manager, that I do not believe
sustainable, as I know that I will be alone in my group at least every two weeks. This is because I
has another teacher who put in a system to be at home every two weeks since she started 1 year ago
back. When she comes back, the children are insecure and anxious, they haven't had a good one
attachment to her due to her only being present every two weeks. It causes
that I get to take care of all 14 children when they come to me. Also had both my colleagues
gone when we had schooling. No support could be given from the others in my work team, then they
had their groups.
This made me feel powerless. The child and the parents did not get a good start, then I
couldn't get involved as we should in schooling. It was difficult when I had
conflict resolution, insecure children, diaper changes, toilet training and more. Had trouble sleeping now
again due to heart palpitations. I was dull and ready to cry. Talked to the boss that now I'm starting
show signs of going back into the wall. She then said they would talk to my
colleague who is a preschool teacher, but nothing more has been done and she is still at home
biweekly. I cried when I went to work. It doesn't feel motivating to go to work, then
I know that the work I do will be pure storage and no educational activity. Now it feels
as if I'm going to be able to get better, it's ME who has to change workplaces and not them
the person who is away all the time, when the boss doesn't hear anything."
Preschool teacher	"What probably gave me the most stress is that I love my profession. I'm really passionate about that
work with just the little ones.
I started in a new municipality when I was pregnant. One with few educated, many
long-term sick leave, and many on their way back from sick leave.
Before that, I had worked with educated people with great commitment, so it became a new reality
for me. After four months I just wanted to cry. By then I had worked with so many
uneducated substitutes that I had lost count and could barely care, because I could
not putting more energy into being “accommodating and taking care of the temps the way they want to be
left"", when the children have to go first. The children that I wanted to be there for, provide security and a
curiosity about life and everything there is to discover! And so many substitutes who have none
knowledge of children at all, who do not even like children, with a child's view that can still give
me palpable anxiety! Where I had to contact the manager because such individuals cannot
work with children. But they exist in children's groups, and knowingly and unknowingly offend children.
And as an educated person with a bleeding heart, you fight for the children to even have kind words
their daily stay, which they themselves are so exposed to... And to work with long-term temporary workers, who
refuses to read the curriculum, attend training courses, refuses to take in anything that applies to young children,
but still one should have an everyday life filled with care and security, it is difficult. And it cuts
the heart of not even being able to work as you want as department manager for your children's group. For
the economy does not exist to give me educated colleagues who also think of the best interests of the children. For
they have already broken... And soon me too. And who is there then to protect the children
against a harmful approach and a childish view from the 20s?"
Preschool teacher	"I graduated in June this year, and as I longed for the 3.5 years to finally start
work with the best we have - our children, our future! But I already feel a great concern about
the future. I started working at a preschool where pedagogy was barely on the map. I
thus began to work in another municipality with a higher salary, work clothes, 90% of
the staff are preschool teachers and the preschool is relatively newly built. The problem is that bright, fresh
and open does not automatically mean premises that work well for the preschool. The premises are
far too small and we have no opportunity to divide the children's group during the day. I am working
with the youngest children, there are 14 children and 3 teachers. The children get into conflicts when we in
principle stand on top of each other and mornings and afternoons we team up with
neighborhood department. We are therefore basically a constant 13-17 children. The pace never slows down and
all meals are eaten in a dining room - which gives an even higher noise level as there are about four departments
who eat at the same time. How will I be able to move up to full-time? Right now I work less to get
more time with my child, but despite fewer hours and finally having a schedule
Unfortunately, planning time does not help. At preschool, we think that we are trying to get through the day
and when I get home, I have far from the energy I wanted to spend time with mine
own children. We barely manage to make sure the children are safe, seen, fed, clean and rested.
How can we work based on the curriculum in this chaos? How can we offer it to the children?
business they deserve?"
Head of the preschool district	"I get both sad and furiously angry when I read all the stories!! Have worked in
preschool since 1979 and have not for one day regretted my career choice! Just like many before me
has spoken; it IS the best job in the world! But unfortunately the politicians have not understood what it is
is about and has given us the worst conditions in the world!! We are the ones who pave the way for that
the future. We lead and humbly show the way to the fantastic conditions life offers.
We are always by the children's side and would rather sacrifice our own health than let the children down. As I see
it is precisely this that has led to today's situation.
The politicians have taken advantage of our solidarity and our loyalty towards both children and parents. It does
It pains me to see Sweden's fine preschool in free fall and everything we have built falls like a house of cards!
Can't take part in more stories where talented educators give up and go home because
a sick work environment! All avenues have been tried but no one has listened. We who manage the future
have an obligation to continue to stand by the children. Who will prosecute their case if not us who
always been there? There is only one way out and that is to strike. A single day and Sweden
Would have stayed. We must once and for all realize that everything has a price. That's enough now. Let 2018 go
history as the year when we educators stood up and made the case for the children. The year we went
together for a better future. There are elections soon and now we have the chance."""
Preschool teacher	"Works at a private preschool in a children's group with children 1-2 years old. We are three full-time employees out of 17
children. Every day we work to row an educational activity, to work according to the goals, to follow
laws and regulations while the children have a rewarding day at preschool. Instead, it feels like us
stores the children and ""gates"" them between activities. I go home every day with a feeling that
I haven't seen all the children and haven't had time to talk to the parents. Sometimes I shed a tear
inadequacy when I get in the car on the way from work. I wish that the zeal and joy I
had for my job during and after preschool education came back! Because really
I love my job!"
Preschool teacher	"After four months in a new place, I gave up. We were promised 5-6 hours of planning a week;
individual planning, in work teams and in reflection groups. The entire preschool included seven
departments. Six departments were located in the same building and would cooperate two by two. On
two departments with 16 children between 1 and 3 years in each group we would work 8. 3 i
each work team plus two in addition, an educator to cover everyone's days off then almost we
everyone worked 80% and a teacher to cover in case of illness and etc. Dream mode I thought.
I barely had time to start before a colleague in the other department was on sick leave. Throughout the house
disappeared, during these four months I worked there, four colleagues on sick leave, six
some resigned. Our colleague who was supposed to cover our days off was transferred to one
completely different department at the preschool. Our 8th employee who would support in case of illness
had to go in on our days off, which meant that there would be two of us in one department, three in another
Other. Sometimes, however, she was sent away to another department to support and we were
then two staff on each side. In case of illness or illness, there were also two of us in each ward.
There were no substitutes. At the end of the semester, however, we got a colleague in the department next door. We
had enrollments constantly, instead of placing all children in at the beginning of the term they came
continuously throughout the course of the semester. We never managed to get a group feeling or start working
with a planned activity according to theme as we constantly had to put it on hold to receive
new enrollment. The positive thing about it, however, was that we were not a full children's group with so few staff
when some children were placed from November or December. The plan never came off,
a lot depending on the fact that all the planning was baked into the schedule and you had to leave your group
in the middle of the day. Preschools I worked at in the past have had planning time outside the schedule, that
sit with before or after work in the children's group, partly so as not to disturb the educational work
in the middle of the day, partly to really make the most of their planning time. During these four months I
worked at the preschool, I was given individual planning once, for an hour and a half. I sat
me often on my own on my breaks to get something done so we could start something up
kind of work. During these four months, we received work team planning three times. We could
not leave our ongoing enrollments plus all the other children of our two colleagues on
the department next door as they were busy with their own group and their own enrollments.
Failure to plan also results in failure of educational activities in the group. Under these
four months, we were able to sit on our reflection time twice, but in the name of honesty, we did
not much to reflect on as we never had time to get planning out. I left preschool for
to try other educational activities instead"
Preschool teacher	"In my children's group there are 2 preschool teachers (100% and 75%) and 1 uneducated (50%). It works
when we have a maximum of 10 children but with the entire group of children in place, it is difficult. We have the biggest
children's group between 9 a.m. and 2 p.m., Monday-Thursday. In the children's group, we have 2 children that we receive support for
and advice from a special education teacher. It is difficult to have enough for 14 3-4 year olds. Most of them don't talk
Swedish and needs a lot of support with interaction and language. We have our business in a module
since 6.5 years ago, it is not adapted to the children's group. One large room, two small, one small cramped
hall, blockage in the drain sometimes, poor ventilation. Before Christmas it was 17 degrees indoors. Ours
working schedule has been changed for more time from the children's group, something that creates bad
work environment and many are looking for another job."
Preschool teacher	"For four years I have worked as a trained preschool teacher, but even now I am trying to make plans
for what I should do if the career choice doesn't work.
Works with children aged 3-5 and in a, as I understand it, relatively small children's group of 20 children
with 2.75 in staffing. Love my job and my colleagues and don't really want to change careers
in life but realize that it may become necessary for my own survival. Increased demands on
administrative tasks mean that the days are an eternal puzzle to cover up
the group of children, who in turn become increasingly anxious, stressed and insecure. The workload becomes
also enormous when no account is taken of which children are in the children's group when children with
the need for extra support seems to be increasing, probably as a result of the above factors. The
The downward spiral is underway and major changes must be made NOW if society is not to stand
facing a collapse. When the preschool stops, Sweden stops."
Preschool teacher	"I see daily how the children are affected by the large groups of children. Today, the children are more
loud, unfocused, in need of more validation than they were X number of years ago. I
have several colleagues who are on sick leave due to stress. I have been too. What kind of start is it in?
the life we ??give them when we can't get enough. The children are our future. Let's give them a safe start.
Smaller groups = more present and happy pedagogues who have the energy to run the business accordingly
the goals."
Preschool teacher	"So that I, as a preschool teacher, can meet children's needs and goals, as well as guidelines such as
placed upon us, something must happen quickly! Tired of babysitting, want to use mine
knowledge and being able to see the children develop into wonderful people with empathy for each other.
Should four years of study be thrown away for this? Raise wages and review the children's future.
Fewer children in the groups give the children greater opportunities to succeed in life. The preschool provides
the basis for lifelong learning."
Preschool teacher	"I really love my job but I don't know how much longer I can take it. The requirements we have on ourselves are
completely unreasonable! To run a well-functioning educational activity at the same time as we have to clean,
wash and wash dishes. We will check that the children's schedule is correct and the number of hours is correct. We
should stock up on paper towels, toilet paper, cleaning agents and take out garbage. We will
both open in the morning and close in the evening.
Every week I have 1 1/5 hours of my own planning time, when I have to come up with all the good ideas
the business is driven forward, prepare development interviews, post documentation online,
print my own documentation that I set up in the department, prepare parent meetings,
enrollments and fill in all the other various papers that have to be filled in without us knowing why.
When someone is sick, we ourselves must be responsible for booking a replacement and if we get someone, it is usually
someone with no training who we are then expected to help and explain to them how our business works
works.
I am a trained preschool teacher to work with the children. To be close to the children in their
learning processes and challenge them in the educational environment, that's what I want! To be the children's
fellow researchers and discoverers are what I'm passionate about! To create an exploratory environment, where we
listens to and sees every child, where the children's influence is obvious, where the children get many
opportunities to express oneself using aesthetic means of expression, where we get opportunities to
regular reflection and further education, that's what I dream of!"
Preschool teacher	"Being alone with 19 children for half a day is not optimal in order to guarantee the children's well-being
security. Even if other departments step in and help each other, everyone's work comes after
the curriculum in a pinch. Preschool teachers plan their teaching activities in a position of dependence on
their colleagues. Teaching children aged 2-6 requires small groups. But there is a lack of staff
and if there is a substitute stop, you can only keep the children and try to make sure that no one gets hurt
one! It will not be a good teaching environment, it will not be a pleasant environment for the children to
distributed to other departments or have staff coming in from different departments. Concern,
stress and not at all from the children's perspective for a good learning environment. We need resources to
be able to have a good teaching environment with a staff density that can at least guarantee
children's safety!"
Preschool teacher	"In recent weeks, a stomach bug and a prolonged fever with a cold have afflicted us
Preschool. The staff working in the most affected departments have almost all been
at home for either one or the other or both. The staff that had to cover up
the days there have also suffered.
As a staff member, you of course help the child who spit up at the preschool, wiping up and cleaning up
to reduce the spread of infection. You cut snotty noses. You are lying next to coughing children at rest.
You do this despite knowing that you are very likely to be infected. It is not one
option to stay away, this is your work environment.
The work we do should reasonably not be rewarded with a grace day. Sick leave with full
compensation from the first day of illness is what would be right. You have performed your work in a correct
way, you have done your best to reduce the spread of infection to more children and colleagues. One
falling ill takes a toll on the body and you are not yourself for several days.
There is a lot of thinking about how the preschool teaching profession can become more attractive in order to get more people to apply
to the profession. But also to get more people not to leave. What is described here is currently a big one
back with the profession. Full compensation from the first sick day can be part of a large job."
Preschool teacher	"Right now as I write this I am crying. Tomorrow I'm going back to work after a few
days off... A job at a preschool in Borås, in a group of 23 loud children, 98% with
other mother tongue, two colleagues, one of whom works 80% due to stress. I don't want to go, my
heart pounding, I'm sweating. I just want to disappear. But right now I have nowhere to go.
With a husband on sick leave, we can't manage financially, so tomorrow I'm going to get up
to be able to open at 5.30. I scream for help. I went to the doctor this morning because I have
a lot of pain in my chest and I feel so incredibly tired. I was given some anti-depressants,
just feel that I can't stand such a life. But I am 50 years old, still have
student loans to pay....What happens to me? Think of us, we need at least as many
vacation days like all other teachers to be able to cope...please ...Help us!"
Preschool teacher	"Just the points you mention in your text about it being understaffed, for large groups of children, fix
and trick/change their and their colleagues' times in order to have a safer environment for the children and
that we colleagues should not be left in the lurch, is correct. Worried parents. No substitutes to be brought in, spring
planning time does not exist. The sick leave is only getting more and more at the preschools, even there
own children go and in their own workplace. As an educator, you want the best for the children and do everything in it
its power that the children should feel safe and have a nice and valuable day at their ""job"". We
need to see and FEEL a big change in the preschool!!"
Preschool teacher	"Help us!
What is a child in preschool? A number of hours or an individual with their own needs?
As the system is now, a children's group is seen in the number of volume hours. When the sum of a certain
time is not reached, more children are admitted to a children's group. The problem that occurs is that
the children's groups become very large.
We have 3 pedagogues working in a department where 18 toddlers will soon start, small individuals who
will get our teaching time and we don't even work full time all of us in the staff. We have children
that run 15 hours and even if they run no more than three days a week, five hours a day
so there is always the possibility that they get up in time for the parents to find work, get one
internship or enters a course and studies full-time. Suddenly we exceed the vulnerable
the volume hours and all the children's needs must be met and they must receive an educational
Operation. There will be competition for friends, competition to get time with the teacher and
competition for space. It was the number of children. Then we have their individual needs. When a child is placed on a
department, the placement coordinator does not know if it is a child in need of special care
rights (BSS). It may concern children with autism, ADHD, attachment, language problems
etc. Imagine that these children have to compete for friends, space and time with educators
15+ other children. It is in preschool age that it is discovered that children have special needs
rights, that's when an investigation can arise. But that doesn't happen until after they are about three years old and
in consultation with parents, which is also a challenge. It may take one to two years before that
parents agree to the child being investigated. Does a child not have a diagnosis when they are going to transition
to school, the chances of the child getting a resource and the support that the child needs are reduced.
Therefore, it is very important that the staff at the preschool have good contact with parents and
can explain the intentions. In the preschool, we meet parents who do not speak Swedish
mother tongue, which means that these calls may take longer and be needed more often. We have
observed that our BSS react more strongly when they are in large groups of children. Even if we
pedagogues work daily to reduce the sound volume and running indoors, so it is
children we work with, and of course there are times when it escalates, but it has an impact
our BSS. There is chaos in their minds and they find it difficult to face the situation. Educators
need to meet these children in their frame of mind and it takes attention from the others
the children. Imagine three educators of 15+ children, of which at least 1-2 children are BSS as it appears
the children's groups right now at younger children.
We have a special pedagogue who goes out and observes and supervises pedagogues in several
preschools. Our special education teacher is always fully booked and it can take months before we get one
time. Remember that once you get approval from parents to connect a special educator so
can the child already be 5 years old and there are only a couple of months left before he goes to school and
you do not know whether you will have time for an investigation so that the child will have the best possible chance in
school. At the preschool, we meet children with Swedish as a second language. This is what we work with on a daily basis
the language. We have had children who do not know a word of Swedish, actually landed in Sweden for two days
before he starts preschool. Imagine ending up with 15+ other kids and three adults and not being able to
make yourself understood. Imagine that you then have to compete with 15+ other children for time with a teacher,
space and friends. We educators must find different strategies to communicate with the children
and several times we have not been allowed to attend courses with alternative means of communication such as
for example, characters as support (THANK). We have to search the internet ourselves for material and try it out
the children's group take it to us. We can get materials from our special education teacher but still not that
we get to take a course. We want proper guidance to meet all our children with their own
unique individual needs.
In the preschool, bacteria and viruses thrive. The staff is constantly exposed to it and even if one
after a while we experience a strengthened immune system and we also get sick. Loyalty to our colleagues is
strong and we are happy to interrupt our sick period to come back. The reason may be that we
know that there is a shortage of substitutes, it is not guaranteed that we will get a substitute when we get sick. When one
If a substitute is employed, it is usually an untrained person who is to be employed in the operations and the planning
we set up the work team. When we normally come back to work too early, it usually does
lead to the disease taking longer to resolve. We get more short periods of illness and
more grace days. But we take it to come back and do our job, even though it's tiring
hole in the wallet and on health (both mentally and physically). But this is not how it should be
be. We educators should be allowed to let go of work when we are sick at home and think about what we are going to be
healthy. We should have the feeling that everything has been sorted out at work now that I'm home, me
can relax. But there is often a shortage of staff and substitutes, and the unions work hard to raise the price
the status of the professions in preschool to make it attractive to work there. But still missing
the competence. Working with children is incredibly rewarding work. But it can be more rewarding for the children
development if we look at the individual and not at volume hours. We educators have chosen our profession
because we want to give the children a preparation for social life, a meaning and a place, a development
and a belief in themselves. But in order for us to realize this as much as possible
we need to look to the person, not to numbers and systems. We understand that statistics and systems
is needed, but we also see that it does not meet the children's needs in preschool because it has become
way too humanized. We would like to recommend all politicians to take a full day (or half day)
and come out as an educator and follow a day at the preschool to see the individuals and those
wishes that are Sweden's future. Take the time to face the reality that you are making decisions about.
Humanize, see and feel the warm exchange that one gets in meeting young people.
We educators believe that there are many children who need special support where we educators
is not enough or has sufficient knowledge. According to the Kindergarten curriculum, we must ensure that
every child's needs are met and we feel inadequate with this as we are not enough.
We believe that there are several children who do not develop language sufficiently because of
lack of staff and lack of time. The guardians feel great concern as new staff often arrive
which also affects the children's safety. We often bring in substitutes who do not have the knowledge that
is required, which takes time away from the children's group as we educators have to guide substitutes into the activities.
We also have difficulty finding temporary workers. We often experience that guardians are not
familiar with the preschool's operations and rules. We educators need time to listen to the children
and see the children, which is part of our mission. What we want to improve in the preschool is for all of us guardians, educators and children. Here
We educators have a lot of responsibility, more responsibility than what is actually in our mission.
Partly the responsibility with parents, the communication, the lack of language, everything administrative. That everything
responsibility is placed on the pedagogues eats up the time that we SHOULD spend in the children's group. We want our
problems we face with parents with Swedish as a second language are taken into account and that
systems can be simplified and designed to meet their skills and language. We want one more
inclusive system for these parents.
Everything else that we do other than being in a children's group is:
Write a schedule for guardians as many have little knowledge in this area.
The guardians have difficulties using self-service and would like to ask for our help
which means more lack of time for the children's group.
Situations may arise when we have to make general calls to the guardians who are having a hard time
for the Swedish language. In the midst of all this, we must help other departments that also have
staff shortage. Of course, we want to help the guardians in the best way possible, but this comes at a cost
of the children's time.
As it may look in the preschool, educators are quitting and others have gone on maternity leave,
yet there is no one to replace these, then more children are pushed into the children's group and no one
realizes that staff is needed.
How do we solve this in the best way?
Sincerely, educators in the preschool"
Preschool teacher	"At our preschool there is a lack of staff almost every day and we are forced to do puzzles and borrow
staff so that no one has to work completely alone. We should preferably not bring in substitutes and when we get and
really need, there are none to be had. Plans fall as we have to solve
staff shortage. Outwardly, we must not show that we are having a hard time. People feel bad, are sick often
and are stressed, you feel inadequate and go home with a feeling that you didn't make it
do their job fully. At the same time, more and more demands are placed on us educators to our
The municipality is working to become ""Sweden's best pre-school"" A goal that, by the way, feels very good
far away as it stands now and with all the planning time lost it is impossible to fulfill.
Studied 3.5 years at university to get to work with what I really love, but as it looks now
is far from the profession I chose to train for.
Both myself and other colleagues have been home with fatigue symptoms but nothing major
changes have taken place to create better conditions to carry out our mission when we
come back.
Uneducated and uncommitted people are brought into the business to cover the staff shortage
and it creates extra work for us educators as even more is put on us. The educational
the planning (if it even exists) gets to be put aside and we get to just babysit for
to make the days go by. Anyone can replace our place and it shows well the status of
our profession as no competence is needed. Many groups of children become rowdy, as a result of
lack of staff and unqualified staff on site.
Despite all the hard work and the fact that we turn ourselves inside out and struggle to try to get quality
our work we are underpaid and are told that we are doing what we should in terms of wages even though we
is several thousand Swedish kroner below other municipalities in the country. It is time for a radical change
in preschool, otherwise many talented and fantastic educators will soon disappear
other professions and preschool fall to a level the politicians probably don't even want to imagine."
Preschool teacher	"Who takes care of the town's little ones when we're not at work? When we have to be home for
the body says it's enough? When we don't get the response we need to cope?
Who takes care of us when we can't take care of the little ones? Who supports us before it goes like this
far? Who has the right to come and insult and criticize us without us getting shit?
Well, an appointment with a psychologist, I will thank and accept.
How am I supposed to handle all this? Stand and be professional when I meet parents at my
Free time. Then I think my life begins. Where I can manage to be with my family, my children! The
I lost my energy and joy after half the day at work because the situation is too
pressed.
18 small, small children, not even 2 years old, but barely three full-time employees where my educational
work becomes pure babysitting, where my great passion for these little ones disappears because I just
must do the best I can, the best of the situation, get through the day! But the next day? And the next one
day? For all children's rights to development and learning, where I want to be there for them! Where
does it exist?
I'll hold out a little longer, I think!"
Preschool teacher	"When I started at my last workplace, I asked to avoid too much responsibility as I am
mother of small children, works 75% and studies 25%. It was me and 2 other fsk teachers and the rest
untrained temporary workers. The preschool teacher in my neighboring department quickly walked into the wall and is
still on sick leave which made me department manager for not only 1 but 2
departments. I was not assigned the responsibility but felt it because those kids were “loud and
low"" and only 2 temps there trying to get through the day. It won't last. The kids need
safe adults who want to provide educational care!
Some days when there are many sick people, I have literally had to clone myself and run forward and
back between 2 departments to get everything moving around and for everyone to get their break.
And there are children with special needs who are outgoing and very sensitive too
this preschool. I have now resigned because I don't want to go into the wall and start
soon at another preschool where I believe and hope that it is a little more stable. But the children are
left…"
Preschool teacher	"I am a newly graduated preschool teacher. I have worked in preschool for a year with no previous experience
in addition to my vfu. I want to show the front feet and I have tried to do that during this year which
passed, which has meant that I have taken on major areas of responsibility in the preschool. In part, I have
started the Läslyftet, which I think is fantastic fun! But I am not given the opportunity to do this.
I have to take from my own PUT time for preparation which becomes difficult when I hardly get out
some PUT time, it has ended with me sitting at home and stressing about catching up when I
know i shouldn't. But at the same time, I don't want to get on the manager's bad side."
Preschool teacher	"As a fairly recently appointed preschool teacher, I feel fundamentally deceived about my education and have doubts
sometimes on my choice of profession. I love children and being able to help shape our society
future for the better sounded like a dream job to my ears. Now that I'm out in the business
I don't know what to believe or feel.
During the training, we got to take part in so much good research, the Norwegian School Board's guidelines,
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, a lot of rewarding workshops and lectures and more, and more. The
made me get attached to the profession and really yearn to get out into professional life and
put their lessons and thoughts into action. Now that I'm here, I mostly feel myself
inadequate and sad.
Insufficient because in my head I really can't figure out how to manage to see and
treat each individual as I must according to our obligations and guidelines. How
will I have time to implement what I learned during my 3 years? That stress now already has
showed up in me with panic attacks, constant nausea and way too many
occasions of illness due to reduced immune system.
I am sorry, among other things, because I feel that I borrowed over SEK 300,000 unnecessarily to
become something that didn't turn out to be the dream I thought at all. All this because of being too big
children's groups, shortage of substitutes and more.
We currently have 18 children aged 1 to 3 years in not even three full-time jobs! We are maybe 3 staff
2 hours a day including meetings and other administrative work and more.
I wonder where the children's rights are in this business when it looks like it does?
The situation is really not sustainable or even humane!
If nothing happens soon, I will definitely change my profession, because it feels like nothing but hell to procrastinate
children for this. These little ones have no say, but must only adapt to the chaos.
It's sick...to say the least!"
Preschool teacher	"Has, after 40 years in preschool, been on sick leave for exhaustion depression. The thing that worries
to me most is how my colleagues who have not yet worked for so long will be able to continue as
preschool teacher. I agree with all these stories in terms of concern for the children, a big one
frustration because you can rarely carry out what is planned, always trying to keep up appearances
up so that the parents feel safe when they leave their children, etc. Right now I want to
just retire. In this work, it is important that private life goes on as if on rails, you don't have any
margins should something happen."
Preschool teacher	"We were short on staff and with a child at school who is having a really hard time
feel safe with us. Basically, 1 staff member is completely spent on that child. No substitutes are available
available if you do not book an appointment well in advance (and even then it is not guaranteed that you will get one
locum tenens). So with a staff member sick, a staff member who had to devote 100% of their attention to
a hysterically crying small child, the last educator was left alone with 11 other children
which would receive an educational activity based on the goals of the activity and the curriculum, which
would feel seen, have diapers changed, get fruit, put on clothes to go out, help with
undressing, food that would be fetched and laid out, etc. When then an educator goes home (after
having to work overtime as well) so I was left alone with 8 children aged 1-3 years who
again diapers would be changed, snacks would be arranged, it would be picked up after rest
and that you should start making a nice ending and meet the guardians who come for
to retrieve the most important things in their lives."
Preschool teacher	"After about 5 years in the profession, my energy is starting to cool down. I have always loved my job and when I had to
choosing the university course, there were no doubts at all. I wanted to be a preschool teacher. The first 3 years were tough
on good I had energy, good Ideas and felt that I had plenty of time for planning, reflection
and above all time for the children.
Yesterday I felt that the last drop in the cup made it overflow. I texted my husband and said
that now I can't take it anymore. Now I want to change my profession. Which actually makes me so sad, because I
I love my job.
But when the children's groups grow and grow. The staff density is getting smaller and smaller. I can
not stand for my professional performance and guarantee the children's safety when we most of the day
(except between 9-13) there are only 2 preschool teachers for 16 children (1-2.5 years). The vast majority of children are
present from 7.30-16.30.
We have children in the group who require an adult present for the day to work. And unfortunately
then we cannot give her or the rest of the children what they need to a sufficiently large extent.
Every day parents call in and report their children sick, we breathe a sigh of relief. Because that means one less
children's group and a more manageable day.
I feel sad, angry and lost. I am a preschool teacher. What else would I do?"
Preschool teacher	"The state subsidy for the preschool
“A short-term investment”
Last year, the city of Borås was able to report reduced groups of children in preschool
that temporary fictitious departments could be opened through the state subsidy. In many places put
dividing walls were put up in existing departments, in others the group was divided among certain ones
activities in the week. A functional use of the extra resources meant that
the business could achieve a higher quality. Extra staff could support at critical moments
as at exit. The pedagogues were given greater opportunity to plan the teaching and were able to
get breaks and breaks more often.
The allocation of the state grant is now ready for the next academic year. Borås gets a significantly smaller share.
This means in most cases that preschools that are left without will close the temporary ones
the departments. Closed departments had normally been met with great resistance. But instead
it is completely silent. It shows that these departments were not worth as much. The departments were
just a short-term investment to reassure employees and users.
When the fall semester begins, we are back at square one. The size of the children's groups will land at approx
the same figures as in the last 10-12 years. Staff density is slowly going down.
The sick leave due to burnout increases. One or two years of artificial respiration will not do
help.
The investment in the preschool must be long-term. Increase staff density permanently. Give
the pedagogues have the opportunity to divide the children into smaller groups during the day. Make sure to pause
and breaks can be taken out. Continue the investment in the salaries within the preschool, so that more people want to start
work here and more people want to stay."
Preschool teacher	"Efter ca 5 år i yrket börjar min ork att svalna. Jag har alltid älskat mitt jobb och när jag skulle
välja högskolelinje fanns det inga tvivel alls. Jag ville bli förskollärare. Första 3 åren tuffade
på bra. Jag hade energi, bra Idéer och kände att jag hade gott om tid för planering, reflektion
och framförallt tid för barnen.
Igår kände jag att sista droppen i bägaren fick den att rinna över. Jag smsade min man och sa
att nu orkar jag inte mer. Nu vill jag byta yrke. Vilket egentligen gör mig så ledsen, för att jag
älskar ju mitt jobb.
Men när barngrupperna växer och växer. Personaltätheten blir mindre och mindre. Jag kan
inte stå för min yrkesprestation och garantera barnens säkerhet när vi största delen av dagen
(förutom mellan 9-13) enbart är 2 förskollärare på 16 barn (1-2,5år). De allra flesta barn är
närvarande från 7.30-16.30.
Vi har barn i guppen som kräver en närvarande vuxen för att dagen ska fungera. Och tyvärr
så kan vi inte ge hen eller resten av barnen de dem behöver i tillräckligt stor utsträckning.
Varje dag föräldrar ringer in och sjukanmäler sina barn andas vi ut. För det betyder en mindre
barngrupp och en mer hanterbar dag.
Jag känner mig ledsen, arg och vilsen. Jag är ju en förskollärare. Vad skulle jag annars göra?"
Preschool teacher-student	"As I'm only a pre-school student, I don't have the whole picture and only see how it looks when I
is in place. However, I have seen some when I was out. There is talk of the big one
sickness absence in preschool, where educators are too ill to show up but where it is missing
temps to cover up. It's very true, but I haven't seen many people talk about it
large sickness absence. I have often met preschool staff who work even if they are sick because
they know that it can be impossible to bring in substitutes sometimes.
I have often seen staff working overtime almost every week to cover up for their colleagues
sickness absence. At the same time, the staff do not have time to carry out the steps they are supposed to undertake
day and sometimes breaks are not taken. There are a lot of staff who work themselves to pieces
themselves in order to give the children the best possible conditions while at the same time putting them under more pressure and
more from a higher place."
Preschool teacher	"Två vikarier och en ordinarie personal hade tre storbarnsavdelningar ute mellan kl. 15-17.
Det var runt 60 barn. Önskar att det hade varit en isolerad händelse men det var/är det inte."
Preschool teacher	"Feeling inadequate makes you feel like a failure. Reduce the children's groups.
Individual planning time in the schedule, etc."
Preschool teacher	"Large groups of children, a number of different languages, socially vulnerable areas, children in need of support, difficult
to have good cooperation with guardians, children who are unwell, high staff turnover i
all suffered. In addition, there are many untrained educators, few pre-school teachers and high levels of sickness absence
at the workplace. It is a complex situation that is unsustainable for an equivalent preschool..."
Preschool teacher	"My story doesn't have to be so long. The crisis unfolds daily. Large groups of children, sick
pedagogues, loud noise, stressed children and adults, lack of substitutes, hardly any
planning time. I myself have been on sick leave 2 times due to exhaustion and anxiety since I became pregnant
fully trained VT-15. The children get hurt and we who work get hurt. No more silence!
During the autumn that has been, the municipality has called us to a meeting to tell us that we as
working in the preschool costs the municipality 5 million a year in sick leave. Are we sick more than
four times in a year we are called to a meeting and possible investigation. The municipal management
seems to have difficulty connecting that large groups of children, among the largest groups in the county, means
extra workload - which of course contributes to ill health among the staff. We have also received
knowing that the municipality will save 48 million on preschool/school, you wonder what you can do
cut back on in a pressured situation? The top manager of the preschool has stated that a
preschool teachers should be able to have as many as nine children per preschool teacher, i.e. theoretically
there could be 27 children in a children's group. During the time that I have worked in the municipality, we have
have not received any further training. The municipality seems to mostly blame staff and push for more
children in already overburdened groups. We preschool teachers don't even have a pedagogical agreement
development time, it will be difficult to carry out the assignment then.
Everyday life is that you often have to go one staff short, even though all the children are in place."
Preschool teacher	"I am in a situation where I wonder if I have chosen the right profession. I have burned to be in a business
where the children's curiosity and desire to learn. I have felt proud to be a preschool teacher.
But now I just feel bitter! Since long-term sick leave is all too common today there are
no choice but to work with temporary workers. What happens is that everything ends up on me when I don't
can require a substitute to do everything that a regular educator does.
Then all these chores that are NOT part of my mission: Picking up/cleaning up needles outside
the entrance several times a week as the municipality does not take it seriously. Shovel and sand then no one
another does it. Call the parking company to try to get rid of a car that has been dumped on
the car park which occupies 3 spaces since 4 weeks ago.
I'm going into the wall! Don't know how much longer I can last?! I have always been convinced
that preschool lays the foundation for all children's development and learning, but as it appears
today it is far from that. Mostly babysitting and trying to make sure the kids don't end up in
conflicts with each other. The politicians should be with the business for a week to see how
reality looks like, because they will never be able to understand it otherwise. And I am convinced
that every single one would be shocked by what it's like to be in that noise level, no matter how much you don't
catch up and what big groups of children there are!!!"
Preschool teacher	"I have worked as a preschool teacher for 30 years and have seen the preschool develop over time. Has
many times thought that now I have to get to grips with our work environment within the preschool, but as for
Most of us don't have the energy, but we trot along as usual. Clearly, our work environment
untenable. The children in the large children's groups feel unwell and are insecure. Know one
frustration at how the children and us educators feel, are treated and not listened to. To perform
his mission with 15 small children aged 1-2 years is completely unreasonable. The stress is total, you can't get enough
to. The little ones are sad and scream and we do everything to keep them calm and safe. While we get
directive that you have to log the children, fix local environments, challenge the children, work in small groups, be
teacher present, wipe tables, sweep floors, pick goods, clean, wash, fix substitutes,
evening meetings, the list can be made as long as desired. Read a lot of good children's literature
learning and approach and about how we meet the individual child's needs. Really
great read but it doesn't work in groups of 15 toddlers. Has been on sick leave at
several occasions due to stress and soon sees no choice but to quit. Is it a worthy one
working life when you are constantly so tired and worn out that the only thing you think about is going home and
sleep?"
Preschool teacher	"It is Tuesday morning at 6.30 and I open at the preschool. My colleague who should have opened with
I haven't seen it yet, I hope she's just late. I hardly have time to think the thought before
the phone is ringing. My colleague will stay home with a sick child today. Out in the hall the first ones start
the families show up. Simultaneous capacity at the highest level now applicable. Receive the child from a
another ward who is new and screams when dad leaves, he just asked me to say hello to something else
the child's staff so I write it up. At the same time, another small one appears who is
very sad. The time is now 06:37. I text the substitute coordinator that I'm alone. Get answer 10
my later and a question about how many children I have. 2 small sad in arms and 2 small like
are on their way in and 3 slightly older ones who are playing by themselves, but I don't have time to write that, so I write
""only"" 7.5 minutes later, I get a reply that the person who was supposed to start at 7.30 will arrive as soon as possible.
Time passes and I am up to 14 children, alone. At 07.13 the colleague appears. Finally
can i breathe out…"
Preschool teacher	"We don't have time to meet all the children where we want. Small meetings with the children do not take place, the stress
has taken over. The focus of my days is often about how to get the day together. A business
is often ""cancelled"" due to staff shortages. To come home after an intense working day and feel
that I haven't done a good job, feeling inadequate. It's a feeling that more will come
and more often. The stress also causes attrition in the staff group."
Preschool teacher	"Have worked as a preschool teacher for 30 years and am starting to feel that I can no longer stand for it
here. The daily stress and feeling of inadequacy is enormous. Now that's enough! The
cannot live up to all the governing documents anymore in the working environment that prevails, we are no supe
people. In the last week, however, I have experienced something fantastic. Many children have
been absent and we have only had 5 children and 3 full-time educators.
My reflection of the week has really shown how it could be in the best of worlds.
We have had time to see and confirm all the children and their needs. Knew one like that
satisfaction of being the educator I desire. The children have blossomed and dared to take their place
in the small context. We have seen children who have grown and who previously did not come forward and
got to see what we hadn't been able to see before. It's so amazing It has to be a powerful and real
change NOW!!!!
For me, it's not about a higher salary as it doesn't mean that we would be able to cope more, but it does
about our WORKING ENVIRONMENT, which is not long-term sustainable for the future."
Preschool teacher	"After thinking for a while about whether I should write or not (I know that I actually have it
""good"" compared to many other colleagues in other municipalities) I have now decided to
share with me my spring semester 2017. The semester when I was close to breaking down and giving up
this profession. I work in a small children's department and in the spring of 2017 we had children 1-2 years old. February June
I myself was involved in pulling around the department as both my colleagues were on sick leave. Major
part were both at home full time and part of the time one worked 3h/day and the other 4h/
day. But even on the days they were there, all the children went to me/after me because mine
colleagues were at home a lot and only worked sporadically, I was their only security.
During this period I had 4 inductions, development talks with all the children and
prepared for our Preschool Day celebration (the entire preschool performs for the parents and
then we have an open house). My time (and my heart) was split between having the new babies
safe while the ""old"" children fought for my attention and proximity
they needed. I have never felt so inadequate! Then comes this substitute... Each
week I had to sit and write a schedule for the coming week, what times was a substitute needed?
Was it not enough with a substitute? So substitutes were booked from week to week, which resulted in
different substitutes all the time. After a while I put my foot down, at least I have to get a substitute who
always is here. So it happened because I talked to the substitute so she didn't book anything else before
the preschool director gave her the next week's schedule. Then we burned her out and were back
back to square one again...
I was so tired both physically and mentally that I couldn't do anything in my spare time and I
don't know how many times I cried myself to sleep. Because of all the stress, I went on
infection after infection, but I couldn't be at home, so I just had to bite the bullet.
Before autumn 2017, one colleague was replaced (she moved to the sibling department instead)
and we had to keep our children's group intact so now we are a 1-3 year department. Am so grateful to receive
spend another year with these children as we got so close when it was just ""us""."
Preschool teacher	"I started studying at university when I was 31 years old. Was so sure it was me in preschool
wanted to work. I took my preschool teacher's degree in January 2016 and was very excited to finally
start working after 3.5 years of studies for my dream profession. Once I started working I got one
shock! It was so stressful and catching up with all the children was completely impossible. Children who were well
too bad we didn't get any more resources. It felt like I was trying to put out fires all the time! And
when I turned one off there were a thousand again. Working with the curriculum goals felt like an impossibility
task. Every day was mostly about trying to survive and making sure no child got hurt
one. That was how everyday life felt. After 1.5 years as a preschool teacher, my body collapsed. I
got burned out. It wasn't just me who took a beating from this profession. My whole family was fine
bad because I was so stressed. I have now been on sick leave for almost two months and am
still very bad. Lying in bed has become my everyday life. I feel cheated and
disappointed by the profession. Terrified to return to the impossible everyday life in preschool. Something
must be made! Preschool is about children's lifelong learning. It will hit hard
society when these little stressed children grow up. It's so horrible."
Preschool teacher	"I don't really know where to start. I myself have crashed twice. Been on sick leave.
When you then become ""healthy"", you are back in the same stress again. You should also be on that
mother and wife. How to cope with everything? How to cope with everything? It is the physical and
psychological stress. To not be enough. Somewhere. Many children, few educators. To be able to change
diaper without another child getting hurt in the meantime. Making sure everyone has food and drink underneath
lunch and if you're lucky, you'll have time to start eating before everyone is ready and has to set the table. Since
do we have the curriculum. The one that we in preschool have to work according to. For me it is the worst stress,
the psychic. Over not being able to have the educational activities that we should have and
as you want! There is no time, no money, no resources. The joy of work is over.
The brain is gone. There is nothing more than making sure the children have the best possible time.
I feel dejected and frustrated."
Preschool teacher	"This is what a week looks like for me:
8-9.15 (2 pcs)
9.15-9.30 (3 pcs)
9.30-11.15 (2 pcs Mon & Fri, 3 pcs Tues-Thurs)
11.15-12.30 (2 pcs)
12.30-2pm (3 pcs)
14-15 (2 pcs)
15 --> 2 pcs
We have 20 children in the group, 8 of whom are two or younger and in diapers. Remaining children are
between 3-4 (5) with different needs. We can start with these 8 children who are two or younger. Two
some of them have teeth that come out, which makes the days a little difficult. One can't go yet. All
8 must be changed AT LEAST twice per day. They have to wear outerwear in order to have time to be outside alone
moment before it's time to sleep in the pram, which means off with clothes and on with sleeping clothes.
They must have fruit before we put them in the cart. Some without teeth that have to be fed
small pieces. Then they will fall asleep, rocked. And then they have to wake up and undress again. Clothes
must be put away, blankets must be put away and the carts must be set up. It must be set. Time for food and two
of the smallest have a lot of allergies, which makes it very careful around these children. Before all the little ones
have been fed, the bigger ones are very hungry and before I also helped them, the first ones have eaten
and want more. Then everyone has to clear the table, the little ones need help to scrape the plate and wash up
of. Time for a diaper change again.
Then we have the 12 remaining children. That screams for our attention. But we'll make it
not included. There is no room to sit down and play games, tinker, puzzle, tie a knot,
ironing a pearl plate etc. And the educational activities? I CANNOT do my job
which makes me angry, sad and frustrated. When I get in the car on the way home, I can't
hold back the tears. I'm so tired! And now it's time to pick up my 6 year old son and be one
happy and committed mother to him."
Preschool teacher	"Hello!
I have worked with children since 1979. Became a preschool teacher in 1992. The development has slowly moved towards
larger groups of children. In recent years, the shortage of preschool teachers has increased significantly. Educators quit
and you can't get hold of new graduates, skills have dropped and that affects the children. My
everyday life is stressful, and full of events so you don't get a breather. You feel yourself
insufficient and it is a struggle to get to their child-free time for planning the educational
the business. In order to help each other, we must further merge children's groups, which means
conflicts, stress and feelings of further inadequacy. We receive new assignments from above such as
must be made and put on. Also other practical tasks that are not included in ours
job description. At night you don't sleep well and your head is spinning with thoughts. I
I won't be able to work until it's time for my pension, I'm afraid of getting sick. Feels
already signs of exhaustion syndrome. Do something now!
Think about our children and our future! Act! Make sure people want to work in preschool again and
building our future together with our competent child."
Preschool teacher	"I worked 30 years in preschool. 16 years as a preschool teacher, previously as a nanny. I felt
that I was in the right place and thought I would stay until 65. But the last 6 years were terrible
many ways. I tried to change my work situation and that of others, sat in the teachers' union
board, was a negotiator and sat in collaboration groups. I am a driven and
solution-focused person. My approach is always the child's needs at the center. Last years
authorized colleagues were reduced from having been 11 in 4 departments to 2. We had to merge
wards so I was the only one authorized for 42 children 3-5 years. To maintain approach and
following the curriculum became difficult when unauthorized people questioned and were the majority. Children were violated daily
and I couldn't mentor everyone around me. Constantly stressed and never felt satisfied
our work. The quality dropped and the worst thing was that I then had a manager who wanted to be the best
myself and did not see my work. What kept me up were children and parents. I finally chose
to send a question to the social sector in case my skills were useful there. And got
immediately a position as a family therapist. Never regretted this. Here I get to grow and
develop and my skills are put to good use. I can manage to have some free time and am more energetic than ever."
Preschool teacher	"Yes, where do you really start? I have worked as a preschool teacher for 12 years and love what I do
profession. The joy you get from the children gives so much back. Unfortunately, the conditions will be
worse and worse for us to see each child. At my preschool, we are no longer allowed to bring in substitutes when
someone is gone, because it creates anxiety among the children according to my boss. Of course I can agree
her to some extent, but the problem is that those who are not at home have to work overtime,
the business suffers as we constantly have to juggle existing staff and us
will never progress in our work with the children. At times we have had to work ourselves with 19
children. We have questioned this to our manager and pointed out that things can happen when we are alone,
her comment is: then let it happen.
If we point out that we feel stressed or that we feel inadequate, the manager says that we
must work on ourselves, we must lower the demands on ourselves.
How long will you be able to work without support and understanding?"
Preschool teacher	"I have now resigned to go to school and preschool class. How can I now be enticed to get
18 children myself compared to today at the preschool where, according to the paper, we should be 3.6 staff out of 28
five year olds? Yes, because in the preschool we have no individual planning. What we get is one hour
department planning every three weeks. Our monthly workplace meetings include lectures on
how the municipality wants our preschool to work, but we are not given the conditions for that. IN
the reality is we are not at all 3.6 staff for breaks, openings/closings, snacks and dishes
is not counted. Then add the fact that throughout my 12 years in the profession I worked with
at least one colleague who is on sick leave, VAB, job training, etc. at least 50% of the time. Add that
we have to save on substitutes and in most cases we don't get any at all! Inhuman both for
us who work and also inhumane for the children! So now I give the profession one last chance by
transfer to school really hope for better conditions there. We actually have
the world's most important and most enjoyable job, but with these conditions it becomes unsustainable
for everyone involved."
Preschool teacher	"We skip temporary jobs again because we know we don't have money. There is a total buying freeze and we
need staples for the staple gun to get material on the wall, but there aren't any.
Today I work 50% right now, as I am on maternity leave with a little 6 month old. Working
over today because someone needs to close. The children notice that several of the staff are gone and
it becomes immediately unsettling. We have some children who need extra support, which we try to catch up with.
Can we make it there before the next eruption occurs? We know we need to reduce our children's group,
as several of them cannot handle the noise level and the room is not big enough, but we educators go
constantly at full throttle to cope in case a child breaks down. Last week I came home with
bite marks after an outbreak. We constantly try to create smaller contexts for the children and
have calm and educational meetings, but sometimes the opportunity is not available when educators are ill. The children
in our group are fantastic but they cannot cope with the large groups of children and the noise level. How will
can we meet these children based on their needs without money for materials and resources?"
Preschool teacher	"How to cope?
I love my job, really. With other conditions, it would be a dream job. I have
only worked as a preschool teacher for two years but is already starting to think about other possible jobs. For
how will I be able to work with this whole professional life? There is a constant lack of staff and that
substitutes are not always available. The children's groups are large and I don't feel like I have time to see
and hear all the children as I want. There are so many tasks that take time from the children:
set the table, set the table, sweep, dry, wash, vacuum.
I can do so much and want so much, but the size of the children's groups and the lack of staff do
that several times a week I come home and feel that I haven't done enough at work. The
the plans made cannot always be carried out due to staff shortages. And about activities
and teaching is carried out, when will you have time to document, analyze and reflect?
Planning time often has to be prioritized away. When I get home, I'm so tired that I don't
I can't do anything but lay on the sofa. We in the staff fight so hard to get the days
to join together. We work overtime. We work sick, to stay at home and get completely healthy doesn't feel right
as an alternative when you know how difficult it will be for other colleagues then. It's time for
change, for the sake of the staff, for the sake of the children and for the sake of guardians. The staff
deserve better conditions to be able to do their job. Children deserve to be safe,
be seen and heard and learn and develop on their own and together with their friends
(smaller groups of children!). Guardians deserve to be able to leave their children at preschool without
guilty conscience and without, during their working day, thinking about how one's children are really doing."
Head of preschool	"Works as preschool director in Eskilstuna.
Most of my work involves supporting, comforting and helping my employees cope
continue to work in preschool. I cannot influence to the extent I wish because the school money
determined from the policy. I, for my part, have my commitments clear to me, it's the budget that
is to be held and it means several children in the business, then I have to swallow it. Unfortunately I don't
it but takes battle, which is not always popular. Four-month warranty - well, then you just have to
against those children in already large groups of children. Tried to dispute this because in the same legal text
there is the text about the size and needs of the children's groups, but look it didn't work - it's the main man
which should provide resources, but they don't and I can't say no.
I would describe the preschool today as a sinking ship where the children and our future are in it
at stake. That I work with staffing every day, both longer and shorter employments
is something that I have done for a long time now. I've gone out and said that everyone needs to see each other
if in their circle of acquaintances there may be someone suitable who can jump in with a card
notice, because when there are sickness absences during, for example, February, there won't be any
substitutes in the substitute pool.
Help where are we going!! I myself go in and work in the children's group when there is a crisis, but that
means that the employees see even less of me as I still have my job. Which means
that my support and leadership exists to a lesser degree. As a preschool director, it is educational
leadership the least I work with during a week, municipal health and conversations with
educators about their work environment, administration of various systems, etc. is what takes more
part of my time.
We need to do something now while there are still some preschool teachers and nannies who
wants to continue working in preschools. And to reduce the sick number of pedagogues on sick leave so that they
also have a chance to get back to work in the preschool. For all children this must get one
Stop!"
Preschool teacher	"The job is stressful. You don't get substitutes when needed. For large groups of children 7.5 children 3-5 years,
5.5 children 1-3 years. There is hardly any time for planning and reflection. Too high sound levels. The salaries
gotta get up!!! We have to tell parents and the media the truth about the situation! It is
crisis!!! There is no money to create a pleasant learning environment. All reports to be written.
You always have a bad conscience because you didn't have time to do everything as it says in Lpfö and all
other governing documents. The politicians would have to come out into reality to really see
how we fight. There is no money for resources either. Children with special support always end up in
squeeze. Sometimes you get help for a short period, but it is only a respite. Because you know that it
help is soon gone.
As a mother, it is not fun to pick up your child from the nursery and be told that he is tired because everyone
talking so loud. He is completely exhausted because of the noise levels so he falls asleep every day when we go home.
It doesn't feel good that you barely know who his teachers are. Are they sick or not?
sick leave, new ones will come."
Preschool teacher	"We almost always have a shortage of substitutes or money has to be saved. Plans rarely come off then
missing staff. More children must come in for us to bring in money. I can't bear to plan that I will
have planning so that most things are spontaneous and half-baked. It makes me not feel like I'm doing one
good job."
Preschool teacher	"Just tell about today and the whole picture becomes clear. I am working part time while waiting for an operation.
Had two things booked on em. It's just after seven o'clock, there's a text message from
the temporary phone where it is asked if I can change my time and work in the afternoon instead. We are
three colleagues in the department, one is ill and the other is going to the doctor with his son. There is
no bay for those who are ill and, moreover, there is a lack of staff in the other department as well.
It's the first day of school today so I had to cancel my stuff in the afternoon,
otherwise there would have been no regular from half past one. This is how it looks too
Often."
Preschool teacher	"I work in a group with 23 children aged 2-5 years, we will be 3 full-time if all are healthy.
I feel inadequate and stressed, my ears are ringing and the whole autumn has more or
less been chaos. Large groups of children, colleagues who are on sick leave due to stress and no money
to substitutes. Week after week, the regular schedule has crashed and I've been in the middle of it
worried group of children and handwritten new schedules with overtime for us who work, often only
start times with the requirement to stay until business allows you to go home.
I canceled my own doctor's appointments, my children's doctor's appointments and other things that I really needed
do, because I didn't know when I could leave my workplace. All time was spent in children's groups,
no planning time, canceled parents' meeting, missed development interviews. Several times I cried
at work when we colleagues misunderstood each other in the stress. We merged several departments, which was done
the children insecure or aggressive and loud. Several children showed signs of unstimulation,
I tried to start activities but often had to leave the children because other children were arguing
each other or a diaper needed changing. I have contacted the union and feel compelled to
looking for another job, after working 25 years as a preschool teacher..."
Preschool teacher	"As bad as the situation is now, I have not been involved before. We have 20 soon to be 21 children in the group
with 1-5 year olds where 8 soon to be 9 children are 1-2 years old. Rules for á prices change so we get less money
and it depends on how many hours the child attends preschool. 25 hours instead of 15
does not give more money, therefore and due to high pressure we have to take in another child.
We are 3 full-time workers and the 15-hour children now become 25-hour children there
the guardians together with the head of the preschool determine the stay times for the children. Wishes
custodians at other times than those we suggest, we may not refuse. The strange thing is that several
guardians believe that when they choose 25 hours, more teachers will be added,
which is not true.
The preschool is so good that all children must get more of it, but there is no money to deposit
substitutes in case of illness or vacation. There are usually no substitutes to be found either. It is
first come first serve which applies if you want to be free and then we get to help each other across the departments.
In my opinion, a big safety risk to work sometimes 2 pcs with 20 children (even if we have to take help from
the neighboring department, so you can't share).
We also have aggressive children who have to be checked all the time so they are stimulated in the right way. I
want to be able to guarantee that the children are safe when they are left with us, but it doesn't feel like that
I can do it at the moment. When now many colleagues get sick (stomach disease, colds and
flu etc.) and on sick leave, it is not unusual to be the only regular in the department
with an often untrained substitute and if you're lucky two. In addition to being the safe point for children and guardians, we must also set the table, wash the dishes,
pick up and leave food trolleys in the kitchen, change diapers, read, comfort, hold groups and gatherings so
we can tell everyone how good the preschool is. When unknown people come in
the children don't always accept these at once, the substitutes can't find the preschool and everything
responsibility lies with me. If you manage to get a substitute, it is unusual for you to have several of the same person
days, it often happens that you have one in the morning and another in the afternoon.
The politicians say that we invest in preschools and schools, we build new ones, but what good does it do when
there is no one willing/able to work there? Resources are also needed for us as already
work so we can and have the energy to do our job. Sometimes I just want to leave the building and go home and
cry. I like my job and have worked as a preschool teacher in the preschool for almost 15 years but am starting
look around for something else because I can't take it anymore."
Preschool teacher	"Worried about the future!
Working in preschool is the best there is, no job gives so much back. The feeling of
be able to make a difference for the children every day and at the same time have fun with colleagues
towards the same goal. Plan and reflect together with colleagues to get the business to
moving forward, want to create the best business for our children, citizens of the future. That each
day feel pride and happiness in their mission, to see the children develop. Doing things a little on my own
free time doesn't matter to me because it's just fun and it adds quality to the children's group. That was my feeling
as new in my professional role in 2011.
Today, just a few years later, I look at the future with fear. The joy and pride that I
felt my mission just a few years ago is soon gone. All I feel is anxiety
and stress because I haven't had time to do what I should. We no longer have any conditions to
carry out our mission. They talk about quality, but we don't have enough to give the children that.
Reflection time is more of a luxury than our everyday life. The colleagues I laughed with are so stressed
that they go into a room and cry on their breaks. You don't have the energy to have any free time when you're like that
tired that you fall asleep on the sofa when you come home with the thought that you forgot to ""olle""
wanted to play that game. We work so hard to create quality in our operations that
we forget who we are here for, we are here for the children. Quality for the children is present
educators who are there to listen and challenge them. Instead, there is a lack of staff, several are
sick and half of them on long-term sick leave. The educators get down on their knees, we do everything but us
not enough. The children are our future and they are so stressed and worried that they don't have time to
sit still for 5 minutes. The children's stay in the business is longer than our working hours, which means that
it is difficult to put together a schedule that covers the day and that is when all the staff are in place. We
can book substitutes if there are any but the economy doesn't support it. It's time for it
there is a change before something serious happens, it's about safety, security for ours
children and our future."
Preschool teacher	"Today we had a fantastic day.
We have had time to go sledding, build snow castles and build labyrinths in the snow. The day
continued with a quiet lunch where the food was enough for everyone, the noise level was just right and we had time
deal with many exciting topics of conversation. During the afternoon we have done
science experiments, built pillow forts, discovered letters we couldn't
earlier and played games together. We have practiced interaction and developed our thinking, awakened
curiosity and desire to learn and has had a good balance between activity and rest. I have seen
and talked to all the children and we have both documented the day's activities and reflected on them
them together with the children.
A fantastic day.
How amazing is it that half the group of children must be absent for that feeling
to appear?
Smaller children's groups are needed NOW!
Because the kids and we deserve to have a great day EVERY DAY!"
Preschool teacher	"I graduated last year after 3.5 years of education and I was looking for my first job. Tense
and expectant. Already during the recruitment process, I began to sense how controlled the man was
becomes I was not told which preschools applied but was matched so that there was none
option. The management then got together to push down the starting salary. I was thrown
into the operations of my new job. I got no introduction. I was thrown into a worried
children's group where the children beat both each other and us adults and where we were constantly
understaffed. I was newly hired but because there was a lack of staff all the time and I
was trained, I had to be thrown into heavy responsibilities straight away. The special education teacher told the management that
the situation was urgent with us, ""they need one more person, they will all go into the wall"". We
received no for an answer. I told them that I had memory lapses and felt bad about work. I got
heard it was normal. I was told “no you are not feeling bad because of the job you are doing
bad because of your privacy”. We were told ""There are no substitutes"", so it was us
who had to work overtime. As soon as you were infected by the children, you were chased and called
time and time again like it wasn't even allowed to be sick. We had to work 12-hour shifts. We
would attend evening classes regularly, come home by 7.30pm and get up at 5am that day
after. During all the training days and courses, we were also told ""don't talk from the outside.""
reality, don't complain about your conditions, don't whine, don't be the boring colleague”. We
had to read a text that said ""Don't be the whiny colleague who complains about the children's group
size"". As if it is somewhat selfish to care about one's mission and the children's safety and
development. Management invalidates what we say. They are supposed to be there to support us but I feel it
rather like they make themselves our enemies when they wave away everything we say and oppress us
because we are not even allowed to talk based on our situation. I just started my career and 9
months after the employment I was on sick leave due to stress because we are used as drudgery and
throw away goods. One day after work, I didn't understand where I was. And now I can't cope
to even be in a store without getting dizzy and ending up there again. I feel so let down
who have spent time and money on this training and already feel that I need to rule
my life in a completely different direction to even survive."
Preschool teacher	"Because of my job, which I really enjoy, I get sick. I get sick because
I just try to do my job, as well as possible. The children are our future and they deserve that
get the best conditions possible and I know that a good educator who wants the best for the children,
can be crucial for some children. I learned that in the childcare training, i
the preschool education, when I have studied further, to, for example, supervisor, mentor, etc. I
have been constantly looking for skills to give the children the best conditions that I can give.
Nowhere has anyone told me, don't do your best, don't bother with the weaker ones, do the right thing
so that you can bear it. They only said that when I got sick, my feeling was that I had myself to
blame, because I tried too hard. I did not understand what they said, because my employer
has high goals for the business that must be quality assured. What wasn't I supposed to do?
The signals from society are, you should be ashamed of being sick. I tried to get out
bed to go to work. Then I got such a headache that I couldn't move. It took
long time to, get outside the door, I began to slowly get better, but my memory was
seriously affected. It was scary that I didn't recognize my bonus daughter, for example
and w h e n n e s c o m p i s when I m e t t h e m i s t a d e , that is where we live.
I wanted to work, I have that drive in me, so I started working without changes in
work rate, into the stress again. I did this twice more. Last time argued
the insurance fund and felt that I, who am a trained preschool teacher, should be able to work at one
stock. With the help of a good boss and municipal health, I am back full time, yes I have
lower my ambitions and not take on as much responsibility. I am sensitive to stress, often get sick, am tired
and pretty much can't stand anything more than work. I understand that I am at risk of getting an early one
dementia and that my memory is damaged. The sad thing is that no one takes responsibility for that
change the working situation for the children or for us. My municipality lowered the à price/child and now
the additional amount for children with mental health problems, such as autism and ADHD, should be removed.
The additional amount shall only apply to medical illnesses. This means that we who have 24 children
and are 3 pedagogues to cope without resources for the children who need an pedagogue, as support
approach yourself all the time to get the conditions to succeed.
For my part, I wish that the School Board's recommendations on the size of children's groups will be implemented
law. I also wish that exhaustion syndrome would be classified as a work injury!"
Preschool teacher	"Want to tell you about ""our"" child-free time, which is next to non-existent. This time to be there to
among other things, both individually and in work teams, plan the business.
We have no individual planning/reflection, but have to hope that some children are sick sometimes
that we can go away spontaneously for an hour or so.
Once a week we have joint reflection in the work team when the neighboring department takes care of it
our 21 children aged 1-5 years. No extra pedagogues are brought in, but during that time have three
educators take care of their own AND our 21 children. This means that three educators have a hand
for up to 45 children.
From a safety point of view, this is COMPLETELY life-threatening, I think, and we sometimes refuse to have it
reflection. This in turn leads to us not having time to do what we are required to do from above and become
incredibly stressed about it.
Currently on parental leave for two years and feel that it is a much-needed ""break"" from work
large group of children that only gets bigger and bigger. Starts working in August again at 80% and feels
that it will probably save me from being completely exhausted. At the same time, I get stressed and get
guilty conscience because I don't know how...or IF...my 20% will be covered so that
my colleagues have to work twice as hard because of me."
Preschool teacher	"Have soon worked as a preschool teacher for 28 years and think hard about how to cope
pension. The last few years have been tough with large groups of children, high staff turnover and
bad substitutes. The election promise about reduced children's groups, where did it go? We have received more
children in the groups and they go all day.
The preschool button that we are going to register the children's presence in works when it wants to and takes it
a lot of time from us staff. Which in turn shows errors in the system....
To have 24 children in premises that were built in the 70s for 15 children is because it
should not work. There is a high volume of sound when these children have to make themselves heard among their peers
or get attention from us educators. I have been hearing impaired due to my job and will be
slightly sound stressed.
All additional tasks that must be done that are not included in the curriculum take time and energy from the children.
Have previously been on sick leave for stress and feel that I will soon be there again.....
My colleagues and I try to keep our noses above water every day!
Even the children feel bad in this chaos, you don't have time to see and hear the children.
Today's preschool is a sinking ship and something must be done before all preschool staff
disappears due to sick leave or change of profession!"
Preschool teacher-student	"I work as a substitute at my VFU preschool and study semester 6 of the preschool teacher program
and my biggest concern is whether I will even be able to cope with the work before I even get my degree..
with departments with incomplete work teams (3ped) due to sick leave, parental leave
and someone who is late makes the business disastrous. Had I had my own children on
these departments I had NEVER left them at preschool. Insecure children with zero
structure in the business. No communication between educators and barely
pedagogues/children for whom there is neither time nor energy. Me as a substitute who jumps around sees and takes
with me a lot about my approach and how I do NOT want to work. How I don't want to see
children as objects, how I have to stand strong and speak up to bosses when you are patted on
head when you say that now it's close that you can't take it anymore, but the boss says yes, a little more
can you The managers don't listen but instead lead their staff into the wall! And the children, poor things
the children. The damage of this activity will be seen later, scream and cry for days on end
because no one seems to know what needs to be done. The goals are so important even though the business is
in crisis say some educators. I say screw the goals and start with getting the kids to bond
to the staff, to keep them safe and well. THEN the goal fulfillment can come! For it
will be as it will be when we do what we do! I hope I can bear to see what I see is terrible."
Preschool teacher	"Works at a preschool with 4 departments. 2 large 3-5 year olds and 2 small 1-3. On our grandkids
are we 21-22 children of 2.75%; toddlers have 14 and are 2;75%. When someone or a few are sick
it is difficult to get a substitute and often you have to try to solve the day between the departments and
work over.
You can't be sick because then you know there will be chaos at work. A lot of tasks to be done
is done, but the planning is often canceled and you cannot find time to take it later.
You don't get much support or encouragement from the preschool director for what you do, they just watch
that if you haven't got a substitute, you've saved some money."
Preschool teacher	"I work at a 3-section preschool and thanks to government money, we are now two extra
resource staff at the preschool (2x75%). But we already know/understand that these services are coming
to disappear by the fall of 2018. It contributes to the fact that our regular schedule will be forced
changes drastically. Our planning scheduled hours disappear. Now we get with need and
barely finished our planning times, we finally got to ""own"" our own planning day ourselves. How
should we be able to run and manage a good business without enough staff at each
section? By allowing colleagues to reflect with each other on the business and the children's
development, that's when there is a change and development in the department. Will
the workforce is constantly reduced and not strengthened, then in the end it becomes just a storage
of the children and ""keep-your-head-above-water"" situation. What kind of preschool do we want?
politicians have? Of course, an educational and inspiring, fun-filled preschool. Then it must also get
cost accordingly! With trained staff, who can and want to continue to do the work that we do
everyone is trained for and passionate about! The children are our future!"
Preschool teacher	"Too large groups of children for the educator to have time to pay attention to all the children and give undisturbed
them the time they need from you."
Preschool teacher	"""My biggest wish for the preschool is smaller groups of children. Greater opportunity to see each
amazing individual and be able to meet their needs. It is impossible to get to know all children,
offer an educational activity, document and give each child the best opportunities to
develops to its best self as the size of the children's groups looks like. Currently, it is ""always""
room for another child and another and another. It doesn't help to increase the workforce (although
there is an incredibly great need for it with) when there are too many of us in the group for the small child,
the child with special needs, the child in need of closeness and comfort, the child who needs support i
interaction, the child who is curious and needs an adult as support in his exploration or for it
adults who are passionate about their jobs but constantly feel fragmented and inadequate. Please,
wake up before it's too late!"
Preschool teacher	"Wonderful day at half a children's group!
Last Thursday (25/2) half of our children's group was sick and off. In other words, we were 8 children with 3 teachers.
That day we had educational moments all day, we documented what we did and
could easily post different things / pictures on the children's page in unique. We could easily succumb
lunch, take a good educational moment at the end: i.e. support/help/lead our 1-3 year olds with
their clothing. At lunch we had a good educational moment when we managed to accompany/ support/ show/
help the children in peace and quiet. I sat with three children and my two other colleagues sat with them
other five. Otherwise, we always sit at separate tables and 4-5 children by ourselves. It became a completely different one
free play, with plenty of space for dressing up, laughing and playing in the afternoon with those present
and the teachers here.
Ohhhh how I wish every day could be allowed to be like that!"
Preschool teacher	"I work at a preschool with three sections and the youngest go to mine, 16 1-3 year olds and we
are 3 full time there. Thinking about what a hysterical work environment we have and that we can't always go on
the toilet when we need. Or take a coffee break in peace and quiet. This was my work day
the other day.:
In the morning I was the last one to go out with our 15 youngest children. We are 16 but one child
was free. Looking at the clock, I realize that my colleague has to start going back in with them
first children she dated. Throwing in a few sips of coffee at the same time as me
squeezes an apple into me while I put on my outer clothes to relieve colleague one.
Colleague two is on break.
Later in the afternoon after the snack when I change the diapers of our then 11 children who are
left I feel an urgent need to go to the toilet! Checking with the colleague, is it ok? ""Yes Yes,
just go, you have to!” Leaving my snack-clearing colleague for a while with 11 children around
around him.
This is today's working environment in reality at many of our preschools!!! That's enough
really! We deserve to be able to sit down for 5 minutes and drink a cup of coffee/eat an apple
peace and quiet. Breathe. Being able to go to the toilet with a clear conscience when we need to!"
Preschool teacher	"Every day at my 3-department preschool, we have to talk about how we solve the afternoons,
after the snack. How do we do the house? ""Do we go out or do we survive if we stay inside and
divide us? Well, I have 11 little ones left and can't bring in any older ones - so we're forced to go out
another afternoon to survive""....
We never have enough staff to be able to have the freedom of choice that the children are allowed to choose, go out or
be in and do something? What kind of educational activity is it when you are crazy for many
children with too few adults and not having the opportunity to do what you want?
Even after the snacks, we have an obligation to conduct good educational activities - but after
15.30 is the most storage and survival on the schedule!
And we always have a lot of children until 16.45-17.00. Many educators work part-time and
are needed even more in the mornings, so then we are not enough to cover a good staffing
also the end of the day. Sigh!
When will we ever get good staffing all day? Yes, the day the children's groups are reduced in number
and the basic staff is strengthened!"
Preschool teacher	"Today, like all other days, I was by myself until 8 o'clock when colleague number 2 arrived.
Together we tried to implement an educational meal with 12 children aged 1-2.5 years. After
feeding, picking out, drying, washing, several nappy changes and various conflict management
dropping two more children into the group, at the same time I will welcome another completely unknown one
substitute, the third this week. Some children get sad and worried, they cling to me and
wants to sit on my lap but I have to change another diaper so they come with me
the changing room. During the diaper change, two of them manage to wet their clothes and another has
stuck his arms in the toilet. While I arrange dry clothes, I hear the anxiety rising inside
the department. The phone rings, many children are sad and tired and they find it difficult to connect
to the substitute who has apparently spent a long time on the toilet... My colleague takes the temp
on a snotty and red-eyed one-year-old that we sent home the previous day but as per
the parent ""has been as energetic as possible"" and is therefore already back at preschool. Before I
when the most tired children are put to bed, I cut fruit into pieces which I singly distribute to the group.
It's barely ten o'clock and I'm already drenched in sweat and ready to cry. How I can handle sex
hours to pass my mind! Actually, I am at my peak professionally. I have 25 years of experience and a
a variety of courses and trainings in addition. I have three fairly grown children and my time as
nagging parent is over. I should be able to go to work every day and feel empowered,
joy and commitment to my job. Still, I've never walked to work with heavier steps yet
I do now. The anxiety creeps in as soon as I park the bike and my thoughts spin
the head. How does the house look today? How many educators are sick? The parental information
must be written today - do I have time? Can I go to the university's tutor meeting tomorrow or should I?
I cancel? How will I be able to carry out my mission as well as I so deeply want?
Yesterday my seventeen year old daughter pleaded with me to quit my job because she is constantly experiencing
me so tired and depressed. Is this how it should be?"
Preschool teacher	"Hello. I have now worked for 2 years as a preschool teacher. I meet colleagues who have worked for 3-4 years and know
not how they will be able to work 5 more years even. I am lucky to end up in a group of children with something
fewer children. 11 small 1-2 year olds, soon we will get 2 more. We are 2.3% and an extra 10 hours a week.
It works, but it's still stressful at times of the day when there are no more than 2 = ie quite
a lot of time in a 12 hour day. We are required to document in at least 5 different places. Thereto
several new concepts in the municipality will familiarize themselves with and understand, and now also quite one
massive form of assessment matrix on the activities that must be done. Get me right,
I love and understand the purpose of educational documentation, but with only 1.5 hours of child-free time
together with colleagues and no own reflection time, it takes sooooooooooooooo long to
move on. Get down deep and not like now, just have time to hurry away something bad, because
to have time to get down what we are obliged to do. Then we have to take some counters, book bays, screw up shelves
etc. for the caretaker we haven't seen for 6 months. We're going to vacuum carpets, because that's for sure
heavy for certain professional groups? Isn't it too heavy for us???? We will wash toys etc
(never got around to it in my 2 years). We have fire protection responsibility, financial responsibility, etc. Yes that
never runs out of all the tasks. Completely shocked when I got out and started working.
Huh??? Should you do All this with???? I will probably last more than 5 years, but I am working
only 75% Full time = I would never be able to do it."
Preschool teacher	"I leave my child at preschool. The teacher meets with a smile in the hall, but I see that
it looks heavy. How are you today, I ask? Yes, it's a bit heavy. I am myself today.
No substitute for my colleague. They are 2 of 14 children. Soon 2 more will be transferred from younger
children. 16 children. Or what I say. They are not 2, they are 1.8 staff. Imagine if everyone knew. It is
not true when talking about the number of staff in the children's groups. We/they will cover 12 hours on
place. We adults have a full-time job of 9 hours with a break, but have to make up for 12. Last year they got
money for smaller children's group, that state. This year they got none. Only some more vulnerable
areas get. They have the same number of children, but fewer staff this year. Sure they have a fantastic one
children's group and they are incredibly competent preschool teachers and childminders, but I know. I
I am a preschool teacher myself, so I know everything they have to do. All these peripheral tasks, all different
parts we should reflect in. I know. I look at them. They are tired, but fighting on. They make a whole
amazing project with the kids and my girl loves preschool more than anything else. But for how long
Can you handle them? How long will we last? I see so many colleagues who feel that they are close to
breaking down everything we have to catch up with if we're lucky 1.5 hours of child-free time a week. Can you figure it out? How
very sensibly deepened, can it be when everything has to be caught up when almost all the time is in children's group?
Well, I've decided. I will get through this, if not for me but for all these lovely children.
But I only work 75%. I will never be 100%. But then I'm one who doesn't
puts a lot of pressure on myself. I can see what my conditions are and work accordingly,
but I so sincerely wish that this profession can get the status and respect that we can really give
all these lovely children everything they deserve. I wish my children to have the right to the best in the world
preschool they deserve. It will start now. When will that change come? Thanks to everybody
colleagues who struggle against the odds every day. We and the children deserve better than this!"
Preschool teacher	"I get discouraged when I think about the situation in the preschool, too many children in the groups and
too few staff. I think it is laughable that there is talk of equivalent preschool in the country, then
conditions are not equal, give all children the right to the same number of teachers and the same size
children's groups. I am absolutely convinced that fewer children would have a hard time in preschool if only
group sizes decreased. I want so much in my work with the children mainly to give all children
the time they need to learn and develop, and I need more planning time for
plan teaching, document and reflect."
Preschool teacher	After the spring enrollments, we will have 15 children aged 1-2 with three members of staff. Crazy!
Preschool teacher	"I graduated in 2013. I haven't worked many days after that and felt like I have
did a good enough job. That I came home and felt ""today I have seen all the children and
performed a good pedagogical work'. The days that I have felt that I am enough, and that I am not
is completely mentally and physically exhausted, is when the number of children has not been so high because of
illness or leave. There will be a lot of ""surviving the day"" and making sure most children are happy
and not cry. At my current workplace, it feels like we have a storage space for
the children and not an educational preschool. We do not have joint planning, not our own planning and
on our planning days, we rearrange the furniture.
What the university teaches is not what reality looks like.
There are more children and longer days, but we are still just as few staff. My boss thought
that it was reasonable that I had 6 one-year-olds myself for a snack and when I said that I felt
me stressed, so she thought that maybe I should take and think about whether I should work as
preschool teacher. When we have to have a substitute (which is quite often), we get different substitutes if we even from
any. For a week I worked with a new substitute every day, so 5 different ones.
Everyone I have contact with from university wants to change professions, not so strange I think.
The ones who take the biggest hit are the children."
Preschool teacher	"Has worked in preschool since 2007. Over the years has lacked identification for the profession, but
a year ago I did a validation at Stockholm University. Now I'm joining
ID card in my hand and have calculated what this year has cost me financially. One
years of studies have cost me a total of approx. 70,000 kroner. I didn't get any
financial compensation from the employer during the study period. To be able to study and work
I chose to be off duty one day a week. In addition, there were costs for literature and train travel
to Stockholm about 2 times a month.
Now I stand, as I said, with the ID card in hand and reflect on the past year
Was it worth it?
No, I would spontaneously reply. My working days have been marred by logistical problems that must
be solved and how we technically solve urgent situations. Enrollment of seven 1-2 year olds who
requires care and security and where the rest of the group of children has been left behind. Not one
hours of individual planning to be able to conduct an educational activity from the outside
we have succeeded in achieving the curriculum's goals.
Thinking about WHEN and IF my studies and teaching skills will ever get
be used properly when reality looks like it does today......"
Preschool teacher	"After 6 years in the municipality, I have chosen to go to another municipality.
This is because there are too large groups of children and too few adults with these small children. All autumn -17
has consisted of schooling. Two to three new children every week so we adults didn't have time with all of them
crying babies, all new parents worried as they saw how we struggled with these new babies.
The ""old"" children in the group we saw were very stressed by the situation with new children and
all these parents who participated in the activities during the autumn. (Parent-active schooling).
The pre-school director said that 15 children in the department are enough when they are small, but when the autumn was finished
there were 18 1-year-olds in the department of 1 preschool teacher, a nanny and an hourly substitute
which were replaced every now and then. We signaled to the pre-school manager several times that it is not possible to take them in
more children, we educators see that children are doing badly. What we got in response was the economy, the preschool is going
back otherwise and that we have to work better with the routines in everyday life. It felt like a punch in the stomach when we got that answer. The routines disappear automatically when
one has 4-5 crying children in one's arms, reached crying children in a cart brought to that child
feel safe there. The colleague has as many crying children in his arms while we had to give ours
hourly substitute (which is different every week) clear directives for table settings bring out mattresses there
the children could sleep.
I was completely exhausted and applied to another municipality. Fewer children, high staff density and
also higher salary. I told my boss that if you can meet the salary, I can stay. It could
he not so then I resigned.
I hope that I will enjoy the new municipality and have promised myself that if not
will be good, then I'll switch, I think completely, completely. No one thanks me for working myself to death
me and cry when I get home."
Preschool teacher	"23 children in my ward, few staff and whole days in stress! The feeling of inadequacy
comes upon us every day. So many children with so many different needs! Has been on sick leave
a longer time but returned to the profession but balancing on a fragile thread all the time Love
my job but this is not Ok!!! Not for the children and not for the educators. Something must be done
and it is NOW!"
Preschool teacher	"Have worked for almost 40 years, but the number of children assigned to the number of staff is significantly higher today.
Longer days for the children, many children in need of extra support, parents who do not respect
that the children should only be at the preschool when the parents are working or studying, not during their own time
friends or gym. In addition, we as educators have received more documentation and others
administration / correspondence to be done."
Preschool teacher	"Coming to work Monday morning and being greeted by the ""news"" that yet another educator is sick and
the air passes me out. This after we have worked briefly with staff for 2 weeks (5-6 of
12 ped away). Now some people sigh and think that this is how it is in most workplaces
""vabruary"". 5 of the 6 who are on sick leave are on long-term sick leave due to stress. The job is done
them so stressed that their bodies have given up, they no longer have a life outside of work.
They can't take it anymore. In some departments the entire staff is gone and the rest of us have to go
in and be the safety in a department that we don't usually work in.
The educational activities are replaced by childcare and it is always about
""get through the day"" which we do because, sadly, this is everyday life for us.
I love my job, but there's no way I'm going to be able to do this anymore
pension unless something changes now:
smaller children's groups!
more staff density!
more scheduled planning time for educators.
premises adapted for educational activities.
cancel the cut-off period at all preschools, private and municipal. We get sick on/off
the job.
higher salaries.
Without us, Sweden will stop!"
